So now that we gain some experience with events and saw a lot of examples and how to work with events
in Javascript, specifically in the browser,
let's have a look at drag and drop and how we can implement such a behavior in a web page.
Now we'll do this on this project example
we already worked on in the past
but before we dive into that, let's go through the steps that you need to go through to make elements
draggable on your web page and then also to make sure that they can be dropped somewhere and that something
happens if they are dropped somewhere.
So to make elements draggable, you have to mark them as such and you do that by adding the draggable
attribute or setting the draggable property on the DOM elements to true,
so both needs to be set to true, either the attribute or directly through the property.
Once you did that, this element is draggable.
The next step then is to listen to a drag start event on the element which is draggable,
this will be triggered whenever a user starts dragging the event. In the event listener there,
you can also interact with the event object to describe the drag operation
if you are copying or if you're moving which will for example also affect how this is displayed to
the user, how the cursor changes and so on and you can also append data to the event because a drag and
drop operation is actually a combination of different events, on different elements on your page and
in order to make sure that they can work together and that you know in the place where you dropped something
what you started to drag in another place, you can add data to that drag event which is then invisibly
kind of passed around to the other events related to dragging and dropping.
So once we started our drag operation and we configured the drag event, we have to tell Javascript where
the item can be dropped.
Of course, the user can drop the item anywhere but we typically don't support it everywhere on our page,
instead we kind of mark the areas where an item can be dropped by adding an event listener
to the element on which the other element can be dropped.
We add a listener to the drag enter and the drag over events. You can omit the drag enter event, you
definitely need the drag over event.
Both will be triggered whenever an item is dragged onto that element,
the difference between the two elements is that drag over basically also triggers for child elements
of the element where you added it, drag enter won't trigger there and then here, the trick is that in
the event listeners you set to these events here,
you have to call prevent default because the default is always that a drop operation is cancelled, so
that drag and drop isn't allowed onto an element because as I said for most parts of your page, you don't
want allow it and therefore that's the browser default,
you have to prevent that default to allow a drop operation, so it's an important step to listen to these
events and prevent the default to allow a drop.
Now before we react to a drop, you can also optionally listen to a drag leave event
if you want to update the UI for example, updates some styles when the item is dragged away from the
element on which it was dragged over. That is optional, not optional at least if you want to do something
upon a drop is that you listen to the drop event on the same element where you listened to drag
enter and drag over. The drop event will only be triggered if you prevented the default in drag enter
and drag over and the item is then dropped onto that same element.
Now in that drop event, you can then do whatever you want to do upon a drop,
update some data, update the UI, move the element on the UI, anything like that because that's also important.
When you make an element draggable, you'll get some visual feedback that looks like the user is really
dragging the element but it's actually not getting moved in the DOM
technically, you have to do that programmatically through Javascript if you want to update the DOM after
performing such a drag and drop operation.
You also optionally can then listen to a drag end event, not on the place where it was dropped but on
the dragged element itself and there you could also then update the UI or some data, whatever you want
to do.
The drag end event is always fired even if the drop is cancelled,
so if the element was dropped in an invalid area but as I will show you, you will get some property on
the event object which tells you whether the drop was successful or not.
So that's the theory,
let's now go through these steps and implement drag and drop step-by-step in our project.